Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to sign up via the link in
the description to get all of the lab files
for this course, so you can try it out yourself
in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer,
but it’s even better, and it includes over
100 guided labs to not only help you
get hands-on practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the
exam topics.
I used it myself when studying for my certifications,
so I feel confident about recommending it
to all of you.
Watch until the end of this video, we’ll
take a look at a lab from NetSim.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In this lab we will configure floating static
routes.
As I explained in the lecture video, floating
static routes are configured just like regular
static routes, except you set a higher administrative
distance value so that the route is less preferred
than a route learned by a dynamic routing
protocol.
So, although static routes by default have
an administrative distance of 5, lower than
any dynamic routing protocol, we can make
it function as a backup route by making the
AD higher.
In this network, Enterprise A has two LANs,
10.0.1.0/24 connected to R1 and 10.0.2.0/24
connected to R2, and R1 and R2 are directly
connected by fiber optic cabling.
R1 and R2 each have two Internet connections,
one to ISP A, with SPR1 and SPR2, meaning
Service Provider Router 1 and 2.
Also a connection to ISP B, here are ISP B
R1 and R2.
In this lab we are going to configure floating
static routes on R1 and R2 to act as backup
routes to allow R1 to reach R2 via ISP A,
even if the direct connection between R1 and R2 fails.
So, the first step is to check the routing
tables of R1 and R2.
I’ll check on R1 first.
ENABLE.
SHOW IP ROUTE.
So, we have connected and local routes for
each of R1’s interfaces, a static default
route pointing to 203.0.113.9, which is ISPBR1,
and a route to 10.0.2.0/24, learned via R2.
Which routing protocol was used to learn this
route?
This O here means OSPF, as you can see in
the legend up here.
So, Enterprise A is using OSPF as their IGP,
interior gateway protocol.
OSPF is by far the most common choice these
days, which is why it was selected by Cisco
as the only dynamic routing protocol you need
to learn in depth for the new CCNA.
Now, which route will be used if PC1 tries
to access SRV1?
SRV1’s IP address is 10.0.2.1, so the most
specific match is this one here to R2, the
OSPF route.
How about if PC1 tries to access the remote
server 1.1.1.1 over the Internet?
This server isn’t in the network diagram
by the way, but it’s somewhere on the Internet.
Well, the only route that matches is the default
route, so it will use the default route to
ISPB.
I will ping to test each of these, but first
let’s take a look at R2’s routing table.
ENABLE.
SHOW IP ROUTE.
So, its route table is similar to R1’s.
Connected and local routes for its interfaces,
a static default route to 203.0.113.13, which
is ISPBR2, and an OSPF route to 10.0.1.0,
learned via 10.0.0.1, which is R1.
So, if PC1 tries to ping SRV1, when SRV1 sends
the ICMP echo reply message back to PC1, R2
will forward it to R1, it won’t take the
path via ISP A.
Now let’s go on PC1 and try those pings.
So, I will use simulation mode to view the
path traffic takes, but first let me ping
both SRV1 and 1.1.1.1 from PC1 to allow all
of the devices in the path to complete the
ARP process.
First I’ll ping SRV1.
Ping 10.0.2.1.
Okay, next I’ll ping the remote server over
the Internet.
Ping 1.1.1.1.
Okay, looks good.
Now I’ll switch to simulation mode.
And let’s ping SRV1.
Ping 10.0.2.1.
It goes to R1, R2, then SRV1, which sends
it back via R2, R1, and then it reaches PC1.
Okay, I’ll switch back to realtime mode,
and cancel the ping using CTRL C. Next I’ll
ping the remote router, once again in simulation
mode.
Ping 1.1.1.1.
Okay, it goes to R1, matches the default route
on R1 and is sent to ISPBR1, which sends it
back to R1, then PC1.
I said 1.1.1.1 is a server somewhere on the
Internet, but of course there is no real Internet
in Packet Tracer, 1.1.1.1 is just an internal
interface on ISPBR1.
It’s called a ‘loopback’ interface.
I’ll talk about loopback interfaces soon
in the course, but let me quickly show you
on ISPBR1.
ENABLE.
SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
So, I actually configured two loopback interfaces,
loopback0 and loopback1, although I ended
up only using one.
Similar to the SVIs on a Layer 3 switch, these
loopback interface are not physical interfaces,
but virtual interfaces inside of the router.
They have multiple uses which I will explain
in a later video, but one convenient use is
for labs like this, to simulate remote destination
networks without actually have to set them
up in the lab.
So, the ‘remote server’ 1.1.1.1 isn’t
actually a server, it’s just a virtual loopback
address on ISPBR1.
Okay, next for step 2 we are tasked with configuring
floating static routes on R1 and R2 so that
PC1 can reach SRV1 if the link between R1
and R2 fails.
So, we will configure one floating static
route each on R1 and R2, using ISP A as an
alternate path.
Let’s go on R1 first.
Enter global config mode to configure the
route.
CONF T. First, write the command as a normal
static route, so IP ROUTE, followed by the
destination network and mask, so 10.0.2.0
255.255.255.0, then the next-hop address,
which is the address of SPR1’s G0/0/0 interface,
so 203.0.113.1.
Now I’ll use the question mark.
It says ‘distance metric’.
The word metric might be a little confusing,
because this isn’t the metric that dynamic
routing protocols use to select the best route
to a destination, this is the AD, administrative distance.
So, to make it a floating static route we
have to set the AD higher than the route learned
via R2.
If we don’t do that, the static route will
be selected instead of the OSPF route to enter
the route table, which is not what we want.
We want the OSPF route to be used by default,
and this static route to be a backup.
OSPF has an AD of 110, so let’s go with
111.
Now let’s check the routing table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Where’s the static route we just configured?
It’s not here, because we set the AD higher
than the OSPF route’s 110, the OSPF route
is selected instead of the static route.
Okay, we aren’t done, R2 still needs its
floating route or else the return traffic
from SRV1 to PC1 won’t have a backup route
if the link between R1 and R2 goes down.
So, let’s configure that on R2.
CONF T. IP ROUTE 10.0.1.0 255.255.255.0, and
the next-hop will be SPR2’s G0/0/0 interface,
so 203.0.113.5, and let’s set the AD to
111 here as well.
Okay, let’s check the route table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Just like on R1, the route doesn’t appear
yet.
Now let’s shut down R2’s G0/2/0 interface
and see if that changes.
INTERFACE G0/2/0.
SHUTDOWN.
Okay, now the OSPF route is invalid, it can
no longer be used to reach 10.0.1.0/24.
So, let’s check the route table and see
if the floating static route was inserted
into the table instead.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
There it is.
10.0.1.0/24 via 203.0.113.5, and here you
can see the AD of 111.
Let’s go back on R1 and check.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, same on R1, the floating static route
now appears in the route table.
So, let’s try that ping from PC1 to SRV1
again.
Once again, I will first ping in realtime
mode so that ARP can complete.
With this new route, R1, SPR1, SPR2, and R2
will have to use ARP again.
Okay, let’s ping.
PING 10.0.2.1.
Now, here’s a cool packet tracer trick.
Click this button here to fast forward 30
seconds in the simulation, to the point that
the ping is complete.
If your ping still hasn’t gone through,
try the ping again, and fast forward again
like this.
The pings are going , so ARP is complete,
now let’s switch to simulation mode and
ping again.
Ping 10.0.2.1.
Looks like the floating static route is working,
the ping to SRV1 now uses the backup path
via ISP A, and the return traffic does the
same.
Before finishing this lab, I’m going to
switch back to realtime mode and show you
another useful tool to check the path traffic
takes.
In a real network you can’t just turn on
simulation mode like in packet tracer to see
the path traffic takes.
Instead, you can use the traceroute tool.
In Cisco IOS the command is TRACEROUTE spelled
out like this, however on a Windows PC it’s
TRACERT, then the destination IP address,
which is 10.0.2.1.
There it is.
So, what does traceroute do?
It’s like a ping, except every Layer 3 ‘hop’
along the route to the destination sends a
message back to the source.
First is 10.0.1.254, R1’s G0/1 interface.
Next 203.0.113.1, SPR1’s G0/0/0 interface.
Then 192.168.1.2, SPR2’s G0/1/0 interface.
Then 203.0.113.6, R2’s G0/0/0 interface,
and finally the reply from 10.0.2.1, SRV1.
Traceroute is a very useful tool for troubleshooting
and making sure traffic is following the intended
path.
Make sure you’re aware of it for the exam,
and try it out in packet tracer labs!
Okay, that’s all for this lab.
Next, let’s take a look at a practice lab
from Boson NetSim.
Okay, for today's Boson NetSim practice lab
we're doing Static Routes 2.
So there are some OSPF configuration labs
in Boson NetSim, but we haven't covered configuration
of OSPF yet so let's do some static routing.
Here's the lab objective.
Build a lab network to test new configurations
that will be rolled out to a production network.
Configure Router1 and Router2 with static
routes so that all devices can ping any other
device.
Okay, so pretty simple lab topology here.
HostA and HostB, with Router1 and Router2.
And what's this, S0/0?
This is a serial connection.
So, I haven't covered serial connections in
the course, that's because they have been
removed from the exam topics list.
So I think you probably won't get any direct
questions about serial interfaces on the CCNA,
but I still think it's good to know so we'll
cover some basic things here.
One of those basic things here is the CLOCK
RATE command to set the, essentially the speed
of this serial interface.
Okay, these are other commands you need to
know.
These IPCONFIG commands are for the NetSim
PCs here, HostA and HostB.
This command sets the IP address, and this
one IPCONFIG /DG sets the default gateway
address of the PC.
So that would be probably Router1 for HostA
and Router2 for HostB.
Okay, here are the IP address charts for each
device, and the lab tasks.
So let's get started on task 1.
Configure Router1 with a host name of Router1.
Okay, well we're already in the CLI of Router
1 here, it's open by default.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME Router1.
Okay, next configure the appropriate IP addresses
on the interfaces.
Refer to the IP addresses table.
Okay, let's do that next.
So interface FastEthernet0/0, the IP address
is 192.168.101.1, /24 mask.
Enable the interfaces, it says right at the
end of here, so I'll just do that.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Okay next one, interface Serial0/0.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.1.1, /24 mask, NO SHUTDOWN.
Now this part here, a DCE cable is connected
to Router1.
The serial link should have a speed of 64
kilobits per second.
So this DCE is a concept in serial connections.
One side is DCE, the other side is DTE.
And the DCE side has to set the clock rate.
So we'll use this CLOCK RATE command to set
a speed of 64 kilobits per second.
CLOCK RATE, here are the options.
So we're looking for 64 thousand.
There we go.
Okay so that's step 1.
On Router1 configure a static route so that
all devices can ping any other device.
Okay so Router1 has these two connected networks,
192.168.101.0/24 and 192.168.1.0/24.
So the only network it needs a route to is
this network here, 192.168.100.0/24.
We could configure this as a default route,
but it doesn't specify that so let's configure
just a route to that subnet.
IP ROUTE 192.168.100.0, /24 subnet mask, and
the next hop will be Router2's Serial0/0 interface.
Okay let's check.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Oh, it's not up yet because this interface
is still down.
Okay, and then we do the same things on Router2,
it seems.
Yes, except on Router2's side we do not need
to configure the CLOCK RATE command because
it said Router1 is the DCE side, Router2 is
the DTE side.
So it will receive the clock rate from Router1.
So let's go into the CLI of Router2.
Click on Router2 here, then console.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME Router2, and then the IP
addresses.
So, INTERFACE F0/0.
100.1, with /24.
Enable it.
INTERFACE SERIAL0/0, IP ADDRESS 192.168.1.2,
again /24, NO SHUT.
Okay, I think that's all we have to do for
this step.
Yes, okay and next another static route, this
time on R2.
So we'll configure it to this subnet here.
EXIT, IP ROUTE 192.168.101.0 255.255.255.0
and the next hop is Router1's Serial0/0 interface,
192.168.1.1.
Okay, now if I check the routing table on
Router2 it should appear this time because
these interfaces are both UP now.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
There it is, okay so connected routes and
the static route.
And if we check once more on R1, now they
appear, okay.
So that is up to step 4, okay next step 5.
HostA and HostB.
So let's get into the CLI here, HostA and
HostB.
So what was it?
Configure the IP addresses and default gateway,
okay.
So HostA, let's check first.
IPCONFIG /ALL.
Does not have an IP address.
and here are the commands we need to use.
So first, to set the IP address, IPCONFIG
/IP (address) (mask).
So let's do that.
IPCONFIG 192.168.101.2 255.255.255.0, and
I forgot the /IP.
Okay, and next the default gateway, IPCONFIG
/DG, and that would be this address here on
Router1, 192.168.101.1.
And let's check, IPCONFIG /ALL.
There is the IP address, subnet mask and default
gateway, looks good.
Next on HostB, first check if there are any
configurations.
Nope, all 0.0.0.0.
So IPCONFIG /IP 192.168.100.2, /24 mask.
And set the default gateway, that is this
address on Router2.
Okay, on Router1 and Router2 display the routing
table, oh we already did that.
I'll just do it one more time.
There they are, you can see the static routes
we configured, yep same here.
And verify your configuration by pinging from
HostA to HostB, 192.168.100.2, okay.
Let's hope it works.
Okay, looks good, pings are going through.
Okay, so this time we actually did the entire
lab, so let's see if we did the correct configurations.
Once you have completed this lab, be sure
to check your work by using the grading function.
You can do that by pressing...clicking here,
grade lab.
Okay, let's see if we did it correctly.
And we did, you completed the lab successfully.
Click OK to view the results for the individual
devices.
So this is the correct configuration.
If we were missing commands they would be
highlighted in red here, if we had extra commands
that we didn't need they would be in blue.
So, all white here so looks good.
Okay, and if you ever have any trouble during
the lab, or even after you finish and you
want to read some explanations, which I really
recommend you do, check the lab solutions
here.
They give you step by step walkthroughs of
the lab, and some in-detail explanations.
Okay so that's Boson NetSim for CCNA.
If you can I highly recommend picking up a
copy, there are over a hundred guided labs
covering all of the exam topics in the CCNA,
and it's just a really great practice resource
for the CCNA.
So if you want to get a copy, please follow
the link in the video description.
Before ending this video I want to take a
minute to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
Thank you to Magrathea, Justin, John, funnydart,
Joshua, Scott, Aleksa, Hassan, Gerrard, tibi,
vikram, Joyce, Marek, Samil, velvijaykum,
C Mohd, Johan, Mark, Miguel, Yousif, kone,
Boson Software, the creators of NetSim, Sidi,
Devin, Charlesetta, Lito, Yonatan, Mike, Aleksander,
and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
These are my JCNP-level channel members as
of June 20th, 2020, by the way.
If you joined recently but your name isn't
on the list, don't worry, you'll be in future
videos.
Thanks again.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.